---
title: Who will be first to charge a Salary for an AI?
date: 2024-09-19
anchor: how-will-it-work
tags:
  - ai
preview_start_line: 17
preview_end_line: 35
---

import Tags from "@/components/tags"

{(new Date(frontmatter.date)).toDateString()}

# {frontmatter.title}

Subscription software has been on a steady trajectory to overtake the entire
software market. I don't have data handy, but it's easy to run through landmark
software products, from Microsoft Office to Apple iTunes/Music to Adobe
Photoshop, and map out the transition. Once upon a time, we purchased these
products once, up front, and we'd get a CD-ROM or MP3 file in return; today they
are all subscriptions. Video games have resisted to some extent (Apple Arcade
and Google Stadia, R.I.P., are not world beaters). But when is the last time you
purchased a disk for anything else? The subscription model is so common that one
might say it has reached its middle age — and we can start to think about what
comes next.

AI is the latest craze, so perhaps we can learn something about future business
models from AI startups. However, if we look around, AI startups are
consistently following the established model: charge $10-100 per seat per month
for a suite of AI tools, accessed by web & mobile apps — like a SaaS in all ways
but the underlying AI technology layer. I imagine that smart minds at these
companies see subscriptions as a comfortable transition strategy to something
new. **And, if AI reaches even a fraction of its enormous promise, that
something new could be much much, more expensive.**

## How will it work?

The whole premise of AI, and the scaling laws that drive it (see [the Bitter
Lesson](http://www.incompleteideas.net/IncIdeas/BitterLesson.html), [Moore's
Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore's_law)) is that AI will soon achieve
see near-human-level intelligence, and it will be available to anyone via simple
APIs.

The first AI product that can truly offer human-level capabilities as a drop-in
replacement for a remote worker should (in theory) be priced close to the full
salary of that worker. After all, the AI offers the same value as an employee,
with lots of added benefits like on-demand scaling. There's a common argument
that AI will dramatically reduce the cost of labor, and that's possible in the
long term, but one could also argue that the incredible *value* created by AI
should be priced according to what it brings to a customer. And the value of an
assistant as smart and capable as a human would be a lot higher than an Office
365 subscription.

And we're not talking about just one employee: This technology is expected to
replace many workers — so a company with 100 employees on payroll could choose
to hire, say, 10 AI employees to complement their workforce. That's an AI bill
on the order of 10 salaries, or about a million dollars a year, which is 10-100x
the price of purchasing a subscription software product for the 100 employees on
staff.

That's a giant recalculation, both for the AI provider and the AI customer. The
dynamics are going to be a lot different under this new model. I can imagine a
few important changes:

**First**, as an AI customer grows its workforce, that company must decide how
much capital to devote to AI vs. human talent. These resource allocation
decisions will mean that AI revenue is going to be more volatile than
subscription revenue. AI companies will have to constantly pitch and repackage
services, the way that IT services companies do today. To combat this, they will
likely repackage some simple capabilities into cheaper subscriptions, but there
will potential for greater rewards in selling AI talent.

**Second**, AI talent is going to mean different things to different customers at
different times. Consumers might be willing to pay $1000 for an AI tax
professional to review 100 documents, while a business is willing to pay $10,000
— but the cost of delivering that intelligence would be largely the same,
assuming cost scales approximately with input tokens. Subscription services are
based on low-marginal-cost technology, but AI adds a layer of significant
marginal cost, and the scaling inputs are going to vary from application to
application. A lot of thought and effort is going to be spent translating AI
cost structures into reliable pricing models.

**Third**, bottlenecks like GPUs and energy are going to play a big role in cost and
pricing analysis. Demand-based pricing is going to be a bigger topic than ever.
AI companies already work through these issues today, but, in a world where
customers are paying for AI employees, the AI companies will have to find smart
ways to pass costs and availability concerns on to their customers.

**Fourth**, AI customers are going to need to adapt to the idea of spending
relatively huge amounts of money on software. CIOs and CFOs are going to have to
adapt to this new world. **And the AI companies that can help them adapt are
going to have a huge advantage.** Packaging AI talent in a way that satisfies
the constraints of enterprise customers will be hard. Metrics (like ROI) and
promises (like SLAs) will mean something totally new. AI companies are going to
have to innovate in this space. It's going to be a lot less exciting than
training the next great LLM, but the financial rewards will be gigantic.

**Fifth**, and most obviously, a ton of product innovation is going to be
required for AI employees to seamlessly integrate with existing companies.
Customers will need customizable security behavior (can AIs get spearphished?),
audio and video avatars, API integrations, oversight dashboards, scaling tools,
and much more.

All of this presumes that we do not reach AGI or some kind of singularity first.
My opinion — which I am *not* going to try to defend here — is that AI is going
to be smart, but not scary-smart, for quite a while.  What I hope to convey is
this: *Assuming* AI tools get to be pretty darn capable before reaching AGI, a
few AI companies are going to be fantastically successful, in part because they
learn to price AI talent efficiently — and those companies may not have been
founded yet.

<Tags tags={frontmatter.tags} label />
